# final-year-project

Research question: How does temperature affect the timescale separation between microbial consumers and resources, and hence the accuracy of the generalised Lotka-Volterra (GLV) model?

Background, importance, and existing knowledge: It is important to understand the dynamics and assembly of microbial communities, as they are fundamental to ecosystem functioning. Inferential and mechanistic models are quantitative methods used to describe and predict the interactions between microbes. In particular, the generalised Lotka-Volterra (GLV) model is a commonly used inferential model, and is frequently fitted to empirical data to illustrate the interactions between microbial consumers and resources. However, the GLV approximation operates under key assumptions, including the additive nature of interactions between microbial populations, and the timescale separation between consumers (slow equilibration) and resources (fast equilibration). As such, properties like metabolite leakage and niche overlap could violate the assumptions, and influence the accuracy of the GLV model. In terms of timescale separation, it is known that smaller timescale separation between consumers and resources can lead to more inaccuracies in the GLV model. The knowledge gap lies in the temperature variable: how temperature influences timescale separation, and hence affect the accuracy of the GLV model. 
Hypothesis: Higher temperatures can lead to faster metabolism and higher growth rates in microbial consumers. This can decrease the timescale separation between ‘slow’ consumers and ‘fast’ resources, violating this assumption in the GLV model. This makes the GLV approximation less accurate. Beyond the thermal optimum, the timescale separation will become more distinct again. 

Objectives: 
1.	Analyse the effects of temperature on timescale separation between temperature-dependent microbial consumers and temperature-independent resources. Analyse its implications on the accuracy of the GLV model. 
2.	Introduce temperature-dependence in resources (incorporating a time delay), analyse its implications on consumer-resource timescale separation, and hence the GLV’s accuracy.

Methods: Incorporate temperature simulations into the existing framework on GLV accuracy (Mustri et al., 2025). Build on existing code and data repositories in Python, and perform simulations. Initially, the thermal performance curve will not be taken into account, assuming that the simulated temperature range is below the thermal optimum of all species. However, different temperature optimums can be accounted for later in the project. 

Implications of results: The results would inform a deeper understanding of the accuracy, limitations, and nuances of the GLV model for future theoretical and empirical research. Temperature can be accounted for when determining the suitability of fitting the GLV model to empirical data – a highly relevant variable – as global temperatures continue to rise and fluctuate in face of climate change. Moreover, future studies aiming to engineer, modify, or perturb microbial communities would benefit from this more nuanced understanding of the GLV’s limitations, as it can inform the suitability of using the GLV model to predict the impacts of perturbations, and inform the temperature range for which the GLV is valid. 
